## Contact point in international agency

Lale Say Head, SRH Integration in Health Systems (SHS) WHO [maternalestimates@who.int](mailto:maternalestimates@who.int); [sayl@who.int](mailto:sayl@who.int) [www.who.int/reproductivehealth/about_us/hrp/en/](www.who.int/reproductivehealth/about_us/hrp/en/)

---

## International agreed definition

**Definition** The maternal mortality ratio \(MMR\) is defined as the number of maternal deaths during a given time period per 100,000 live births during the same time period. It depicts the risk of maternal death relative to the number of live births and essentially captures the risk of death in a single pregnancy or a single live birth. Maternal deaths: The annual number of female deaths from any cause related to or aggravated by pregnancy or its management \(excluding accidental or incidental causes\) during pregnancy and childbirth or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and site of the pregnancy, expressed per 100,000 live births, for a specified time period. **Concepts** Definitions related to maternal death in ICD-10: Maternal death: The death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and site of the pregnancy, from any cause related to or aggravated by the pregnancy or its management \(from direct or indirect obstetric death\), but not from accidental or incidental causes. Pregnancy-related death: The death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, irrespective of the cause of death. Late maternal death: The death of a woman from direct or indirect obstetric causes, more than 42 days, but less than one year after termination of pregnancy **Related Statistical measures of maternal mortality** Maternal mortality ratio \(MMR\): Number of maternal deaths during a given time period per 100,000 live births during the same time period. Maternal mortality rate \(MMRate\): Number of maternal deaths divided by person-years lived by women of reproductive age. Adult lifetime risk of maternal death: The probability that a 15-year-old woman will die eventually from a maternal cause. The proportion of deaths among women of reproductive age that are due to maternal causes \(PM\): The number of maternal deaths in a given time period divided by the total deaths among women aged 15–49 years.

---

## Method of computation

**Computation Method** The maternal mortality ratio can be calculated by dividing recorded \(or estimated\) maternal deaths by total recorded \(or estimated\) live births in the same period and multiplying by 100 000. Measurement requires information on pregnancy status, timing of death \(during pregnancy, childbirth, or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy\), and cause of death. The maternal mortality ratio can be calculated directly from data collected through vital registration systems, household surveys or other sources. There are often data quality problems, particularly related to the underreporting and misclassification of maternal deaths. Therefore, data are often adjusted in order to take these data quality issues into account. Some countries undertake these adjustments or corrections as part of specialized/confidential enquiries or administrative efforts embedded within maternal mortality monitoring programmes. **Rationale** All maternal mortality indicators derived from the 2019 estimation round include a point-estimate and an 80% uncertainty interval \(UI\). Data are available and can be downloaded from the webpage “maternal mortality – levels and trends 2000-2017: http://mmr2017.srhr.org. Both point-estimates and 80% UIs should be taken into account when assessing estimates. For example: The estimated 2017 global MMR is 211 \(UI 199 to 243\) This means: The point-estimate is 211 and the 80% uncertainty interval ranges 199 to 243. There is a 50% chance that the true 2017 global MMR lies above 211, and a 50% chance that the true value lies below 211. There is an 80% chance that the true 2017 global MMR lies between 199 and 243. There is still a 10% chance that the true 2017 global MMR lies above 243, and a 10% chance that the true value lies below 199. Other accurate interpretations include: We are 90% certain that the true 2017 global MMR is at least 199. We are 90% certain that the true 2017 global MMR is 243 or less. The amount of data available for estimating an indicator and the quality of that data determine the width of an indicator’s UI. As data availability and quality improve, the certainty increases that an indicator’s true value lies close to the point-estimate. **Disaggregation** Current MMR estimates are reported at Country, Regional, and Global levels. Regional level estimates have income strata per World Bank classification, by UNICEF and UNFPA regional groupings.

---

## Importance of the indicator in addressing gender issues and its limitation

The low social and economic status of girls and women is a fundamental determinant of maternal mortality in many countries. Low status limits the access of girls and women to education, good nutrition and family planning—key determinants of too early, too many, and risky pregnancies—as well as to the necessary health services to prevent and/or treat complications of pregnancy and childbirth. **Comments and limitations ** The extent of maternal mortality in a population is essentially the combination of two factors: i. The risk of death in a single pregnancy or a single live birth. ii. The fertility level \(i.e. the number of pregnancies or births that are experienced by women of reproductive age\). The maternal mortality ratio \(MMR\) is defined as the number of maternal deaths during a given time period per 100 000 live births during the same time period. It depicts the risk of maternal death relative to the number of live births and essentially captures \(I\) above. By contrast, the maternal mortality rate \(MMRate\) is calculated as the number of maternal deaths divided by person-years lived by women of reproductive age. The MMRate captures both the risk of maternal death per pregnancy or per total birth \(live birth or stillbirth\), and the level of fertility in the population. In addition to the MMR and the MMRate, it is possible to calculate the adult lifetime risk of maternal mortality for women in the population. An alternative measure of maternal mortality, the proportion of deaths among women of reproductive age that are due to maternal causes \(PM\), is calculated as the number of maternal deaths divided by the total deaths among women aged 15–49 years.

---

## Sources of discrepancies between global and national figures

The maternal mortality ratio is defined as the number of maternal deaths divided by live births. However, to account for potential incompleteness of death recording in various data sources, the MMEIG first computes the fraction of deaths due to maternal causes from original data sources \(referred to as the “proportion maternal”, or PM\), and then applies that fraction to WHO estimates of total deaths among women of reproductive age to obtain an estimate of the number of maternal deaths.  In other words, the following fraction is first computed from country data sources: PM= Number of maternal deaths 15-49/All female deaths at ages 15-49 and then the PM is used to compute the MMR as follows: MMR = PM × \(All female deaths at ages 15-49/Number of live births\) where the estimate of all deaths at ages 15-49 in the second equation is derived from WHO life tables, and the number of live births is from the World Population Prospects 2019. With this as background, a few reasons that MMEIG estimates may differ from national statistics are as follows: \(1\) Civil registration and vital statistics systems are not always complete \(i.e., they do not always capture 100% of all deaths\) and completeness may change over time. The MMEIG estimation approach attempts to correct for this by using the above approach, which involves first computing the PM. \(2\) The MMEIG often applies adjustment factors to the PM computed from original data to account for measurement issues \(such as how the country defined “maternal” deaths; misclassification; or incompleteness\). \(3\) The MMEIG uses the standardized series of live births from the United Nations Population Division, as published in World Population Prospects 2019, in the denominator of the MMR equation. To better inform the WPP, countries should discuss discrepancies directly with the UNPD. The contact address is population@un.org; this email address is monitored regularly, and messages are dispatched to the appropriate analysts for each country or concern. \(4\) Statistically speaking, maternal deaths are a relatively rare event, which can lead to noisy time trends in data over time. As the goal of the MMEIG estimates is to track long term progress in reducing maternal mortality, the estimation process involves some smoothing to generate a curve that better captures changes in underlying risk

---

## Process of obtaining data

The MMEIG maintains an input database consisting of maternal mortality data from civil registration, population-based surveys, surveillance systems, censuses, and other specialized studies/surveys. This database is used to determine the number of maternal deaths and where possible the number of deaths among all women of reproductive age \(WRA\) to calculate the "PM" proportion of maternal deaths among WRA. The MMR is then calculated as MMR = PM\(D/B\); where "D" is the number of deaths in women aged 15-49 \(WRA\) and "B" is the number of live births. The number of live births is based upon the World Population Prospects 2019. Statistical modelling is undertaken to generate comparable country, regional, and global level estimates. The model’s fit is assessed by cross-validation. Estimates are then reviewed with Member States through a WHO country consultation process and SDG focal points. In 2001, the WHO Executive Board endorsed a resolution \(EB.107.R8\) seeking to “establish a technical consultation process bringing together personnel and perspectives from Member States in different WHO regions”. A key objective of this consultation process is “to ensure that each Member State is consulted on the best data to be used”. Since the process is an integral step in the overall estimation strategy, it is described here in brief. The country consultation process entails an exchange between WHO and technical focal person\(s\) in each country. It is carried out prior to the publication of estimates. During the consultation period, WHO invites focal person\(s\) to review input data sources, methods for estimation and the preliminary estimates. Focal person\(s\) are encouraged to submit additional data that may not have been taken into account in the preliminary estimates. Adjustments are made according to the data source type: \(1\) CRVS, for completeness and misclassification of maternal deaths \(2\) reports providing "pregnancy-related" mortality, for underreporting of these deaths, as well as over-reporting of maternal deaths due to inclusion of deaths which are accidental or incidental to pregnancy \(thus outside of the definition of maternal mortality\).  The analysis also accounts for stochastic errors due to the general rarity of maternal deaths, sampling error in the data source, errors during data collection and processing, and other random error. For information on data sources, see [https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/maternal-mortality-2000-2017/en/](https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/maternal-mortality-2000-2017/en/), p. 14.

---

## Treatment of missing values



---

## Data availability and assessment of countries’ capacity



---

## Expected time of release

Data collection: Source data are collected by countries, typically yearly for CRVS sources, every 3-5 years for specialized reviews, every 5-7 years for population-based surveys, every 10 years for censuses.  Data release: The next round of MMR estimation is scheduled for publication 2022.

---

## Source

Data and metadata were extracted from Global SDG Indicators Database on 28 May 2021. For more information, please go to the following: [https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/database/](https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/database/) [https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/files/Metadata-03-01-01.pdf](https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/files/Metadata-03-01-01.pdf)

---

